---
layout: post
title:  Remembering My 2 Years at UBC
date:   2021-01-17 12:00:00 -0500
categories: personal research
---

It has been 2 years since I’ve finished my MSc (master’s in computer science) at UBC. Before I procrastinate any further and forget too much of it, I’ve decided to grant permanence to what I consider to be one of the best periods of my life.

I’m still not entirely sure what message I want to get across --- but I suspect that this post might provide value for three different groups of readers:
- Friends and family who want to know more about my life (I appreciate you!!)
- Any prospective student curious about the Computer Science MSc at UBC, the Systopia lab, or life with my MSc advisor Ivan Beschastnikh
- Anyone at all who is considering the MSc vs PhD vs industry question, and wants one example of what this path could look like. Surprisingly, I have had multiple people recently ask me for advice in this specific topic.

I hope that catering to these three audiences simultaneously doesn’t dilute the meaning in this post too much. We shall see. 

This post was heavily inspired by Jean Yang’s [What My PhD Was Like](https://jxyzabc.blogspot.com/2016/02/my-phd-abridged.html) and Philip Guo's [The PhD Grind](https://clementfung.me/gallery/pguo-phd-grind.pdf). Once I finish my PhD, I hope to write something equally as informative and substantial.

### A short preamble

Just in case you aren’t aware, not all master’s degrees in CS are made the same. This is especially true in CS, where many schools in the USA offer course-based master’s degrees in computer science. These programs have a relatively small focus on research progress and emphasize course and project work a great deal. At UBC (and at many other Canadian universities), the vast majority of students do a research-based master’s. The UBC model differs from the typical US model in the following ways:
- Like PhD students, all MSc students are funded. This is usually through a research supervisor’s grant, and sometimes through a TA fellowship.
- At UBC, we took 6 graduate level courses, and wrote a thesis. The thesis is expected to be a year’s worth of work, and is roughly equivalent to a first-author conference submission.
- It is quite rare for undergraduates to enter directly at the PhD level, and instead they will do a master’s first before potentially transitioning into a PhD.
- Some master’s students start the program without a committed research supervisor and are expected to find one after their first year. I was one of these cases.

Alright, that’s enough context for now. Here is the story of my master’s degree, told over 7 school semesters. 

### Fall 2016

Fresh off of my undergraduate degree and 2 months of backpacking across Europe and Asia, I came to Vancouver energized, optimistic and completely clueless. I took 3 graduate courses and told every student/professor that I met that I was “broadly interested in machine learning”. It turns out that >50% of my incoming cohort had the same idea. On the first day of my orientation, one of the PhD students in the ML lab tells me that the chance of an unknown, unfunded student joining their lab now is virtually zero.

Nevertheless, I pushed forward; I found any ML-adjacent professor I could and sent them cold emails asking for meetings. Every single one of these emails was ignored or forgotten. The rest of my mental energy and time this semester was spent completely on courses. In one of these courses, Ivan’s distributed systems course, the entire course was spent reading, reviewing, and discussing papers everyday in class, which was foreign yet exciting to me at the same time.

Once I land back in Toronto to visit my family over the winter holidays, Ivan sends me an email, asking if I would consider working with him as his student. The prospect sounds exciting but I know very little about distributed systems which scares me.

### Winter 2017

After spending the winter holidays considering my one-and-only option, I meet with Ivan in the first week of January and agree to be his student. I don’t believe I’m exaggerating when I say that, as of the start of 2021, this has turned out to be the single best decision I have made in my career. Despite formally agreeing to be Ivan’s student, I didn’t “actively” do much research in my first term with Ivan. I wasn’t writing any code, or iterating on any single research project. 

Looking back, I really grew in two ways throughout this term. The first is that I was really encouraged by Ivan to build my research taste: every week I read a few papers, took notes on them, and discussed my thoughts with Ivan. Our lab also hosted a weekly reading group that featured lively discussion. To anyone in CS grad school who intends to be a creator: don’t underestimate the value of building your taste (this has been best [said by Ira Glass](https://vimeo.com/24715531)). 

Secondly, this was the term in which I really started to get more comfortable at UBC socially. In addition to forming a community with my research labmates, I really began to connect with the wider CS department as a whole. For anyone considering the CS department at UBC, let me just say that their culture is phenomenal; every week the graduate students in the CS department would host tea, bar nights, board game nights, and a student-run casual lecture series. As grad school continued, these events and friend groups kept me sane as things got tougher in the coming months.

### Summer 2017

In April of 2017, Google published [a blog post introducing federated learning](https://ai.googleblog.com/2017/04/federated-learning-collaborative.html): the topic that would end up being the basis of my research for the next 2 years. On paper, this was a perfect topic: federated learning was a novel method for distributed machine learning (lots of unsolved problems), and was backed by one of the biggest tech companies in the world (wasn’t going anywhere). It also helped incredibly that federated learning was a perfect fit at the intersection of my and Ivan’s interests. 

This was the first term in which I did research full-time, with no other course or TA obligations. Initially, my project was to support a peer-to-peer version of federated learning, complete with data privacy and security. As the summer progresses, we add Tor onion routing and differential privacy to the system. The summer is a lovely time, work is not very stressful and I end up having a pretty great semester overall.

### Fall 2017

After working on my TorML system for the entire summer, Ivan and I are ready to write it up and submit it to EuroSys 2018; the deadline is in October. I've never written a serious, non-course-project paper before, so the thought of making bold research claims to completely anonymous reviewers is absolutely terrifying. For about 4 weeks straight, I work frantic and disorganized late nights leading up to the submission. I distinctly remember the day of the deadline being one of the most stressful days of my life. After working non-stop for the entire day, we submit with 30 seconds remaining; I immediately curl into a ball on the floor of my lab and Ivan takes me to the bar for a drink.

This is also the term that I moved in with some of my UBC cohort friends to a basement apartment in Kitsilano. The rent costs over a third of our MSc stipends, and the apartment is barely livable. We frequently have to deal with mice and in certain areas one has to duck to avoid bumping their head. However, Kitsilano is a lively neighborhood that I completely fall in love with. We live 10 minutes from the beach and everything we need is walkable on foot. As a carefree 24 year old living across the country from home, it’s perfect.

### Winter 2018

In January of 2018, the TorML paper was sent back with a rejection. Looking back, it was easy to see why, and it would be the first of many paper rejections I’d receive in my career. Nevertheless, I was demoralized. I’ll never forget the encouragement and support that my labmates, especially the senior PhD students in my group, provided me during this time. I now know that they had certainly experienced numerous paper rejections over their years, yet still took the time to check in and provide encouraging words to a first year student. I really hope to be as helpful and encouraging as I become more senior in my PhD.

Ivan and I continued to make research plans and prepared TorML for a resubmission in February. As I’ve now learned, resubmissions are much less stressful than paper submissions, and the rest of the journey for TorML was relatively smooth (after a couple more rejections, it would eventually be accepted to a workshop in 2019). TorML was far from groundbreaking, and I'll be the first to admit it had many flaws. But, you never forget your first time.

### Summer 2018

There is no need to get repetitive about my research here so I’ll keep it short. I expanded my work in federated learning and produced two additional projects and papers from it: FoolsGold, a defense against sybil-based poisoning attacks on federated learning, and Biscotti, a blockchain-based peer-to-peer federated learning system. Much like TorML, both of these papers were written up and submitted frantically, went through multiple rejection cycles, and were eventually accepted. In my opinion, both FoolsGold and Biscotti turned out to be far stronger papers than TorML; I suppose this came with experience as my taste and opinions developed. 

Otherwise, I’ll say this once more and for the last time: summer in Vancouver is absolutely perfect. Every weekend, my friends and I explored the outdoors. Friday evenings were spent out drinking on the beach, talking late into the hours of the night. I’ll always remember those summers in Kitsilano. I truly felt at home and it was some of the best times of my life. 

### Fall 2018

The final month of my master’s involved writing and presenting my thesis. I’ll be completely honest here: my Master’s thesis was just my latest TorML submission with adjustments made to the formatting. To anybody stressing over their master’s thesis right now: my master’s thesis was easily approved with minor formatting fixes, and I highly doubt that anybody has read it in full since. I certainly haven’t.

By the end of 2018, I was finally forced to really start thinking about my future. By this point, I knew that a software engineering job was not going to interest me and I was committed to a career in CS research, so a PhD was the natural next choice. Despite working with Ivan for 2 years, I was looking to move away from distributed systems research and wanted to branch more into machine learning security and privacy. Ivan offered that I could stay on as his PhD student at UBC, but strongly encouraged me to at least apply elsewhere.

Most PhD programs accept applications in December, so there was plenty of time for Ivan and I to collaborate on a shortlist of supervisors and my personal statement. I applied to 8 PhD programs and, later in 2019, I was accepted to 6 of them. 

One issue with my plan is that all my program start dates were not until the Fall of 2019. By a complete stroke of luck, one of Ivan’s former PhD-mates had just founded a privacy-preserving blockchain company in Berkeley, called Oasis Labs. One referral and a couple interviews later, my plans for 2019 were fully laid out. I met all my friends in Vancouver for the last couple of times, and on New Year’s Eve 2018, boarded a plane to Berkeley, California.

## Closing Thoughts

People frequently ask if doing a PhD in CS is worth it: you’re severely underpaid and overworked for 5+ years, in an industry that can otherwise pay you very, very well. The common response (for optimists, at least) is that, even if you don’t ultimately decide on a career in research, the skills you learn and the experiences you have during the journey make it all worth it. I think the same thoughts can apply at a lesser scale to an MSc in CS. 

I grew tremendously during my 2 years at UBC: as a researcher, as a thinker and as a person. I made many lifelong friendships and was privileged enough to intimately understand an amazing city. Of course, I owe a huge amount to UBC, to Ivan, and to the friends I made in Vancouver. I can’t thank them enough for those 2 years and will always think of this period with fondness as a special time in my life.

